
On November 21, 2002, after delays, false starts, and missed deadlines, Burt Rutan’s Scaled Composites was ready to do a first hot fire test of its hybrid rocket motor.  At this point, the still-secret SpaceShipOne – Burt’s hope of getting past the atmosphere – remained a work in progress, and time had become an issue.  But a successful motor test would be a turning point in what Burt considered the most important project in his company’s history.

Getting to this day had been difficult. Scaled Composites had wanted to build everything related to the outside of the motor, including the propellant tank, case, and nozzle.  But Scaled was an airplane company, with no experience making rocket engines.

The hybrid motor, which Burt and Pickens had sketched on a napkin in Huntsville, Alabama, was a cross between traditional liquid and solid rocket motors[MEW1]. Instead of using the common rocket fuel of liquid oxygen and hydrogen, their motor would use laughing gas and rubber (nitrous oxide and hydroxyl-terminated polybutalene, or HTPB). The rubbery part was pliable and could be touched without gloves. Some Scaled employees had coffee coasters made from the stuff.

The critical ablative throat and nozzle needed to operate at very high temperatures. Scaled engaged a specialty company, AAE, to supply these component, knowing they had supplied ablative nozzles for all the big companies that made rocket motors.  But Scaled also needed to find some source for many other components they did not have expertise building: injectors, igniters, valves, controllers - the critical metal components on both sides of the big tank.

In order to maintain secrecy, Scaled sent out RFPs (Requests For Proposals) to the all the big rocket companies, using a cover story about building a hybrid rocket motor for an unmanned sounding rocket whose mission was to measure the top of the atmosphere for NASA’s earth-sciences programs.  They got only two types of responses: no bid at all - apparently revealing an attitude that the project was hopeless, or bids to buid custom-designed components at a cost that exceeded the entire SS1 budget.  Plan B was to visit at the community small operators including Gary Hudson, eAc, SpaceDev, and Tim Pickens.  Two of them self-un-selected by staging failed tests during evaluation visits by Scaled.

Rutan decided to fund the two remaining most promising shops with the promise that the best components identified during the tests would be used on a historic new space program. Scaled set up fixed-price competition between SpaceDev and eAc to see whose components would fly on a manned ship out of the atmosphere.  Scaled quickly decided to ask SpaceDev to stop work on their parts intended for the front of the tank, the fill, vent and dump valves and their associated plumbing and controls, and to proceed with a sole-source contract with eAc for these.  The really difficult parts on the 'hot side' (at the back of the tank) continued as a bake off between SapceDev and eAc.

The promise of the first hot fire test energized the crew. A quote by Plutarch was scribbled on a white board: “The mind is not a vessel to be filled but a fire to be ignited.” Ignition was the word of the day. This motor test would be by SpaceDev, and eAc would get its chance six weeks later in early January. Burt went over safety procedures and talked about how far the company had come in its design of all the components.  He talked about the safety of hybrids, and said there wasn’t much that could go wrong with the day’s main event.

On a bright and cool Mojave day, with light winds out of the east, the SpaceDev motor, about the size of a van, was mounted on a stand in the desert.
